[Transcript missing]
Now, of course,
you want to take this wiki and actually
make it look like the rest of your site.
You're going to want to
take it and add custom tags,
as I discussed earlier,
to allow through the whitelist.
We actually provide at least a
dozen professionally designed
themes that look great,
but maybe you want to do one
that actually matches the
rest of your web presence,
and we'll get a little bit
into how to do that as well.
You may want to add links to the
sidebar of your group homepage,
and we'll discuss that
a little bit as well.
and David are the two people who
are going to be working on the data.
And lastly,
you may want to connect the wiki to your
external applications so that you can
get data into the wiki and pull data out.
And we'll be having a great
demo of that as our last demo.
So the first way
Some customization in the
Wiki without having to write any
code or do any manual configuration
is just to use the Settings page.
This is where you'll choose between
those dozens of great themes.
You can upload a banner of your own.
We'll scale it for you.
You can create a sidebar which performs
a search based on any tag you want.
And of course,
you can enable podcasting in the blog.
That's kind of basic,
so the thing we're going to get
into now is how to do some more
advanced things with the server.
And the first thing that you may
want to do is allow additional
tags through the HTML scrubber.
And this is going to allow content
that normally would get scrubbed
out when you save the pages to disk.
And that could include things
like Flash plugins with video,
iframes with content from other sites,
JavaScript, and custom tags.
So I don't know if you can read
the JavaScript dialogue there,
but it says, I have your session ID,
and it lists the session ID,
and then says pwned.
So how many of you here have
heard of cross-site scripting?
A few of you.
About a third of them
server engineers over there.
Cross-site scripting refers to
the ability of one Wiki user,
in this particular case,
to run a script on somebody else's
machine using their context.
So it's definitely something you'll want
to watch out for when you're allowing
things like plugins and scripting that
you may not want people to be able to
run code on other people's machines.
That's why we keep it off by default,
but provide a way for you to turn it on.
So the next way you might
actually want to customize your
wiki is by using a custom theme.
And that actually allows you to
change the presentation of your
wiki and add functionality as well.
And to illustrate how
a theme actually works,
I'm going to go over what
actually comprises any page that
comes out of the wiki server.
So the first thing we send out in the
HTML are link tags for the theme's CSS.
So this is where you can place
any of your color choices,
borders, anything that basically defines
the look and feel and makes it
match up with the color palette
and general theme of your site.
Okay.
The next thing we send
out is the system CSS,
and this defines the basic page metrics
for everything from the basic page
layout to all of our JavaScript controls,
such as dialogs, pop-ups,
the WYSIWYG editor.
We send that after the theme CSS so
that it's a little bit more difficult
to accidentally override something
that our functionality depends on.
But there is actually a
way to get around that,
and there's a couple methods,
and James will get into that later on.
The next thing we send out
is the system JavaScript,
and this concludes all of the
interactivity that you see on the Wiki.
So the WYSIWYG editor, the tagging,
comments, history,
basically all the functionality
with which you interact with the
Wiki Server is sent out at this point,
and it's all added via
JavaScript after the page loads.
Next, we send out script tags for
your theme's JavaScript.
This means that you can put any
JavaScript in your theme and it will
get automatically added to every page
that comes out of the Wiki Server.
And finally, we of course send out the
content of the page itself.
So that's what makes up a page,
but what makes up a theme?
It's basically a bundle.
It's a folder full of various files
that describe the theme's look
and feel and its functionality.
The first of those files is actually
a thumbnail so that when the user
chooses a theme in the settings page,
they'll be able to see a picture of
what the theme is going to look like.
The next thing we include is
a screen.css and a print.css.
Those define the print and screen
stylesheets for your theme.
Next, we have a theme property list.
This contains metadata about the theme,
such as a desired
banner size to scale to,
a display name, and a list of sidebars.
and finally,
you can include any JavaScript you
want and anything with a .js
extension will get added to every
page coming out of the Wiki Server.
But to back up just a little bit,
I'm going to get into the different
sidebar types that you can actually
specify in your theme's property list.
So there's different sidebar sections.
The one that's probably most
common for people to use is
a search sidebar section.
And in this,
you can define any kind of search you
want based on keywords or tags or both.
Define the sorter order,
and it will automatically populate
the sidebar on the group home page and
reload it without refreshing the page.
You can also add a list of
static links to your theme.
So this means that you can have
links to other parts of your site,
basically any links that are outside
of the wiki that you just want to add
and have them show up statically every
time you load the group homepage.
There's a calendar sidebar section,
which always displays upcoming
events from that group's calendar.
And then, of course,
we add an admin sidebar if
somebody is logged in as an
administrator or a group owner.
And this provides the links to
the settings page as well as a
way to edit tags in bulk and find
pages that users have deleted.
So the first thing you may want
to do in your theme is define CSS.
And that's what allows you to turn this--
and David are the two people who
are going to be doing the demo.
I'm hoping you're going to do something
a little more easy on the eyes,
but for the sake of the demo,
I wanted to do something
a little bit drastic.
I also tend to be a little snarky.
To show something a
little bit more realistic,
I'm going to bring up
James Craig to demo CSS in a theme.
So can I get the demo machine?
All right.
So I've got my standard install of
Leopard Wiki Server running here.
And I'm going to pull up Safari.
I'm going to size this window
back down a little bit.
So I pull up Safari and I've
got a list of groups here.
So I'm going to go to the first group.
And I want to customize
this a little bit.
Now, John mentioned that you can
do anything you want with CSS.
And we have some documentation out there.
It's the first result in Google for
extending your Wiki Server.
I encourage you to read it.
One of the ways that you can
do it is to start with our
default wireframe Wiki theme.
And that allows you to do
pretty much anything you want.
It's kind of a
start-from-scratch CSS theme.
But the other thing that you can do,
and this might be more
beneficial for you guys,
is to take one of our existing
shipping themes and just
change a few properties of it.
Essentially piggyback off of
our CSS and change a few things.
And so I'm going to pull up Dashcode.
Just to show you what
this theme looks like.
So I've got my theme1.wikitheme.
This is in the sample code
that you can download for this
session on the conference site.
It's also on the ADC site.
And among other things in there,
we've got our preview PNG,
and that's just a little thumbnail that's
going to show up on the settings page.
We've also got the theme plist,
and this is just an XML file.
Now, what John mentioned,
you can do a lot more with this,
but I've kind of stripped
it down to the bare minimum.
And what we've got in there,
we've got a version.
We've got a display name,
and that shows up along with a
thumbnail on the Settings page.
And we have this name,
which is just a unique identifier.
And it can really be anything you want,
as long as it doesn't conflict
with one of your other themes.
The other things that we have in
this theme folder are print CSS,
and this one just
imports the default CSS.
You might need print CSS, for example,
if you have a theme that's got a
black background with white text.
Well, it turns out that backgrounds
don't print very well,
don't print on most browsers by default,
so white text doesn't look very
good on a white piece of paper.
So you can change those CSS.
It's a different media type.
You can change it and do
what you want with it.
In this case,
we're just using the default one.
Now, this next one is Screen CSS.
So this is what's going to show up
on your iPhones and your desktop
browsers and stuff like that.
And this first line up at the
top just imports the default
styles for our existing theme.
So as you can see, we've already got this
existing theme in there.
It happens to be called Horizon Blue.
I'm just importing all
the CSS from that one.
And in addition to that,
I'm importing a couple of local styles
just to change a couple of properties.
and that particular file is this
one right here called mystyles.css.
So this is all we're
gonna do for the demo.
Just change a couple lines of CSS.
So the first one defines a
background color for the page.
This is kind of a hex
value for a slight yellow.
And the next one,
we're actually going to rearrange
the order of the columns.
So I'm actually going to close this
because this isn't the live file
and I'm going to open the live file.
We're going to edit for the server.
So it's just that one,
there's a couple lines of code.
Now again, this first line changes
the background color.
So because I'm logged in as an admin,
I'm gonna go to the settings page.
And I'm going to edit the settings page.
Choose the new theme.
All your custom themes show
up down here at the bottom.
We've already got these two installed.
So here's my thumbnail.
Here's the display name.
I'm going to choose that one.
Click okay.
You can already see in this preview mode
that it's changed the background color.
And that's pretty bright
yellow on that monitor.
Once I've saved it,
you can see it's changed
for every page on the site.
Here it is on the blog,
even though there's no content.
Here it is on the Wiki page.
It's across the site,
but you might have noticed that
the default order of these main
two columns here hasn't changed.
So I'm looking at the code,
and this is the live code.
And I'm thinking, okay, well,
this is column secondary,
which is the second one here.
And I'll show you how I figured
out what those classes are.
But I'm not sure what's going on.
So there's this preference in Safari.
If you go to the Advanced tab in Safari,
you can show the
Develop menu in the menu bar.
And once you enable that,
then you get this secondary
function on a mouse click,
or on a secondary mouse click,
you can say Inspect Element.
And this pulls up the WebKit Inspector.
It's a really cool debugging tool.
And I'm going to click
on this DOM node here.
That's the column secondary.
So, again, that's the sidebar contents.
[Transcript missing]
So if we look at the rules,
we've got one called
groupHome.columnSecondary.
That's the main part of this.
And it's set to float right.
GroupHome.columnSecondary.
And it's set to float left.
And because the system
styles come after this,
then it wins in the order of the cascade.
So, in order for me to override this,
I'm going to have to make a CSS rule
that is more specific than that
other one that has two classes.
So, instead,
what I'm going to do is I'm going to
This is a div with a class of
column secondary that is in another
thing with a class of group home.
And that's a more specific rule.
And I'm going to do the same
thing for the primary column.
I'm going to save it and
kill the WebKit inspector.
Refresh the page.
And it flips the columns.
So in case you're running into any -- oh,
thank you.
So in case you're running
into any CSS debugging,
you can go in and check out
the order of the cascade.
John asked me not to say CSS specificity,
but that's the word to search for
if you want to know more than that.
Thanks a lot.
Thanks, James.
So as James mentioned,
the WebKit Inspector and some of the
other similar tools on other browsers
are really useful for debugging CSS.
And you'll find it invaluable when
something in your CSS isn't showing up.
You can find out exactly why
and how to be more specific.
So that's a great tool for you to use.
Now, you may want to do something more
than just change the presentation,
change the look and feel.
You may want to actually
add functionality.
We had somebody in the lab yesterday that
wanted to add server status to the wiki.
Things like that are where you'll
actually want to add custom JavaScript.
And this is where you can add additional
functionality and markup to your pages.
And the way you do this is
by overriding a method that
we implement called prepare.
Prepare is a little bit different from
Onload in that Onload will actually only
run once the page is entirely rendered
and all of the images have been loaded.
We found in our usage that sometimes
that would make the toolbars and
some of our additional functionality
that we were adding to the page via
JavaScript to show up seconds or,
if somebody has a page of 100 images,
maybe minutes after
the page has displayed.
So the prepare method will
actually run as soon as the
document object is available.
There is a method called
onDOMContentLoaded
that is fairly similar,
but it doesn't work on all the browsers.
So prepare is a great
cross-browser way in the wiki
To add content to your page immediately
as soon as it's visible to the user,
and that way they don't see the lag
that is typical in adding things
to the page using JavaScript.
So after you get called
with your prepare method,
you use a W3C DOM to modify your
document to add whatever you want,
remove things, move them around,
add your own functionality.
And then, of course,
you can add your own AJAX hooks to
pull data from servers if you need to.
We include several JavaScript libraries
to help you with this and
to make your life and,
of course, ours as well a lot easier.
Those libraries include
Prototype and Scriptaculous.
You can use Prototype to
traverse a DOM really easily,
and I'll show you an example in a second.
You can use Scriptaculous Builder
to build elements with a lot
less code than if you were just
creating nodes manually in the DOM.
And you can even use Scriptaculous
Effects to animate in some
of your new functionality.
if you want to have some added pizzazz.
To show you an example of
how this might be done,
I have some code here that
adds an additional link to
the footer of every page.
So the first thing I'm doing
is I'm stashing away the
original prepare method.
We, of course,
implement prepare ourselves so that
we can add the toolbars and set
up the WYSIWYG functionality and
everything else that's interactive.
So before you override
our prepare method,
you'll, of course,
want to stash away the original one,
and that's what we're doing
in this first line here.
Then we implement our own prepare method,
and the first thing we do in
that prepare method is call the
original one that we stashed away.
And that will add all of the toolbars
and everything just like before.
The next thing we're doing is
using prototype to traverse the
DOM and find the first unordered
list under the page footer element.
So this is an example as to how
the included libraries make life
a lot easier for you in finding
a particular part of the page,
traversing to it and adding
something to it yourself.
And then I actually
said to use the W3C DOM,
and I'm cheating a little
bit here for brevity's sake.
I'm using inner HTML to just add another
list item to that unordered list in
the footer with a link to Apple's site.
To show a little bit
more of this in practice,
I'm going to bring James back up for a
demo of custom JavaScript in a theme.
Thanks again, John.
So we've got the same default install.
Standard install.
I'm going to bring up Safari.
And we'll go to our second
group here with the hypno-toad.
And I've got this blog that
I think is filled with terribly,
terribly interesting content.
And I have a ton of readers,
and they all think it's
terribly interesting,
too, and they want to share it.
And so I want to add a dig link.
You guys are familiar with the
social networking linking site,
Digg, D-I-G-G.
So I want to add a dig link to every
one of these web log entry pages.
Now, I don't want to put it on
this main blog listing here.
I don't want to put it on the wiki page.
I don't want to put it
on my calendar page.
I just want to put it on
the individual blog entry.
So I'm going to click
on one of those entries.
And you can see that I've just
got a regular wiki page here.
It's got the title and some content and
an image in the toolbar and paginator
control and the comment functionality.
It doesn't have a dig link yet.
I don't want to change anything
about the way this page looks.
I just want to add some JavaScript.
So I'm going to show you how to do that.
So I'm going to pull up Dashcode again.
and we'll move to the second theme.
Now this one is just like before.
We've got a preview thumbnail
of what it's going to look like.
We've got our plist that has --
it's just stripped down to the bare
minimum because I don't need to
do anything with custom sidebars.
I'm going to have a banner on this one.
So it's just got the version.
It's got a unique
identifier for the name.
And it's got the display name that's
going to show up on the settings
page when we choose the theme.
And again, we've got our print CSS.
It just defaults to import
the shipping print CSS.
We've got our screen CSS,
and this one is almost
the same as the last one.
It imports the Horizon Green theme
because that's the one that we're
using on this particular blog.
And it does nothing else.
Like I said,
I don't want to change any of the CSS.
I'm just going to import all the
CSS from one of the existing themes.
And so the only thing special that's
in this theme directory is this other
file over here called adddiglink.js.
It can be called anything, but it does.
As long as it has a .js extension,
then the Wiki Server is going to
know that it's a JavaScript file,
and it's going to
include it on every page.
So as John showed you,
we've got our original prepare function.
We store it away.
And then we override that
original prepare function
and execute the original one.
So this is what -- what this is going
to do is it's going to set up our
toolbars and it's going to set up the
dialogs and the comment functionality.
It's basically going to keep the
rest of the Wiki Server working.
And then in addition to that,
you can add your own code.
So all the rest of this
is in a conditional.
And this conditional,
I'll explain the shorthand here.
This is using the
prototype dollar method,
or dollar function to get
anything with an ID of WikiD.
and Jack So how did I find this?
I'm going to go back
to the wiki page here.
And I'm on the web log entry page.
I'm going to inspect the element.
I'm going to go up and
look at the body tag.
And this body tag,
you can see right here,
has an ID of WikiD and a class
that includes web log entry.
And so that's what I'm going to do.
Any page that's just a web log entry,
because I don't want to
run this on the calendar,
I don't want to run this
on the main Wiki page,
I don't want to run this on
the main web log listing page.
It's only going to run
on this particular page.
And so the next thing that's
running inside this conditional,
I set up a dig link that just
goes off the dig site and uses
whatever the window location URL is.
And then I use some more shorthand here.
This is builder.node.
Some of you guys might
be familiar with this.
This comes in builder.js part of
Scriptaculous and the prototype library.
And what this is going to do is
it's going to set up an A element,
that's an anchor,
and give it this dig href
that I set up the link.
Then it's going to put this text,
dig this, in that text link.
We could have made this an image one.
We could have done, we could have,
you know,
had it be the iframe of how many
times it's been dug and whether
or not the user has dug this page.
but we wanted to keep the
example pretty simple.
And the last thing this does
is it inserts that element
before the paginator widget.
The paginator widget is this
We're going to insert that
link right before that.
I'm going to go back
to the main Wiki page,
go to the settings because
I'm logged in as an admin,
and I'm going to change the theme.
Again, we drop down here to the bottom.
Here it is.
We select it, save it.
Looks exactly the same as it did before.
The only difference is that in that list,
I know that that's the one that said
something about adding a DigLink.
So if I go to the main wiki page,
nothing happens.
If I go to the main blog page,
the listing page, nothing happens.
But when I go to one of the
individual web blog entries,
then I show up with this
little DigLink right here.
It runs right as the page loads,
adds that DigLink.
And this one is running off a local host.
So if I clicked it,
it would go to the Dig website.
But since the Dig server can't see it,
then it's going to think it's a bad link.
If you were to take the sample code,
which is again available on the
conference site and from the ADC,
and run it on your own public web blog,
it's going to work right out of the box.
And I encourage you guys
to mess around with it,
because I think you guys can do much
more interesting stuff than this.
So thanks a lot.
Thanks, James.
So along with debugging your CSS,
you're probably going to want to
debug your theme's JavaScript.
And if you're anything like me,
if your code works the first
time that you try it out,
you're a little terrified.
Almost all code breaks
the first time you try it.
So debuggers are crucial here.
And in the latest nightlies of WebKit,
there's an excellent debugger
built right into the inspector.
You can set breakpoints
and it's super fast.
So it's much improved, in my opinion,
over the old Drosera stuff and
it's definitely worth checking out.
And it's my debugger of choice now.
But you can see here that the
code isn't always going to break
in your own JavaScript code.
Something may happen,
something may cascade,
and the bug may actually
occur in our code.
And I dare you to look at this line of
compressed JavaScript code and actually
figure out where the problem lies.
So there is actually a
way to work around this.
And you can go to a URL on your server,
which is /collaboration/debugmode.html.
That brings up a web page with a
checkbox for turning debugging mode on.
And when you turn that on,
it sets a cookie in your
particular web browser,
which will then cause the server to
send out uncompressed JavaScript.
So instead of seeing this
in your JavaScript debugger,
you see this,
complete with comments and much,
much easier to find out what's going on.
And in this particular case,
I actually deliberately broke the page
by removing the link search element,
which it's looking for
in this line of code,
and then falling over.
So by turning on debug mode and
using the JavaScript debugger,
you're going to have a great way to
figure out what you did to break things.
The next step that you may want to
do is you actually may want to change
the HTML that comes out of the server.
and you can do this by
creating custom XSL templates.
And if you take any of the
system's XSL templates and
copy them into your theme,
it'll use the ones in the theme
instead of the system ones.
So this allows you to change
the HTML that actually gets
generated by the server.
Now, when is this useful?
It's useful for browsers in
which JavaScript is disabled.
And that's the one case in which
this is absolutely necessary.
But I will give you the caveat
that without JavaScript,
there's no editing of the wiki.
It's a read-only system at that point.
But again, if you want to be able to make
the changes without JavaScript,
XSL is the way to do it.
This is also one of those
things where I'm kind of saying,
don't do this, but here's how to do it.
And the reason for that is that,
for one thing, it's not useful for adding
dynamic content to your pages.
XSL is a transformation language,
so it's taking a context XML document
and turning it into a web page.
So if there's a piece of information that
isn't on the page and you wish to add it,
JavaScript is the way
to do that and not XSL,
because that information isn't
there and therefore it can't be
transformed into anything else.
The other thing to watch out for
is that it's not future-proof.
When you take Apple's template
and you copy it into your theme,
it's going to use the copy of
the template that's in your
theme now and not the Apple one.
This means that if we send out software
updates with bug fixes or enhancements,
you won't see those because it's
going to continue using the one
that you've used in your theme.
So you at least want to make
sure that you track it so that
you can look for diffs and patch
them into your own XSL templates.
And lastly, you'll definitely want to
exercise caution when actually
removing elements from the page.
As you saw earlier, I removed the link
search element using XSL,
and that made the JavaScript fall
over because it was expecting
that element to exist.
So if you actually want to have
elements not show up on the page,
the best way to do that is to turn them
off using CSS and using display none.
That makes them invisible to the user.
But any JavaScript that
depends on it will still work.
So that's a little bit about XSL.
And again, I kind of issued the, like,
the edict or, you know,
the preference that you're going
to get a lot more done and be a
lot more future-proof if you use
JavaScript rather than XSL to
change your markup of your page.
But lastly,
the one thing that you may want to
do is talk to the Wiki Server from
other scripts or other applications.
and there's two great industry standard
ways to get data out of the server
and to put data into the server.
So firstly,
if you want to pull data from the server,
you can use RSS and Atom for that.
And there's lots of different scripting
modules that handle RSS and Atom.
And every page that
you look at has a feed,
at least one feed.
And every search that you
perform also has a feed.
So you can perform a search that
does what your script needs,
grab the RSS feed and
use that for your script.
CREBS.
And if you want to push
data into the server,
we also handle a couple of
industry standard methods for that,
and those are MetaWebLog and AtomPub.
And you can use either of those to
add Wiki entries and blog entries
and get data into the server.
And to show a really cool demo
of what you can do with the APIs,
I'm going to bring
James Craig back up here.
Thanks again, John.
So because we're not actually going
to be showing the code in this sample,
it's more than will
fit on a couple pages.
I just want to talk to you about
what's actually going to happen.
So I've got my phone up here,
and I'm going to take
it out of airplane mode.
[Transcript missing]
This local server,
it could be running anywhere.
It could be an external.
It's usually on a server,
but it could be running anywhere.
And what that's doing is every now
and then it's checking to see if
there's a new image in this RSS feed.
When it checks to see
if there's a new image,
it gets that image back down,
pulls it down, it does a little bit
of image manipulation,
and it pushes it off to the
Wiki Server blog via metaweblog.
Can I bring the house
lights up a little bit?
Can I get somebody to
bring the house lights up?
Maybe.
That's okay.
I'll take a photo of this and you can
kind of see you guys in the background.
Look a little plushy here.
And I'm going to email this off.
Send to my WWDC demo.
It creates an email.
I'm sending it right now.
Still sending.
And I'll go to the group.
And it may or may not be here already.
So it's not there.
Let's see if it's still sending.
Hey, guys, quit using your iPhones,
because then I can get out.
All right, it looks like it's sent.
and it's not there yet,
but in the meantime,
I can show you some vacation photos
of mine with impossibly beautiful
people if you'd like to see them.
The Internet is a truck.
It's a series of tubes.
So it's running a little bit slow,
but we'll get it.
There it is.
I'm in your demo.
So I got a little plushy animal
and you guys in the background.
And that's it.
So thanks again, guys.
Okay, so as James showed you,
there's actually a number of really cool
things that you can do using the APIs.
And so in summary,
there's a number of different
ways that you can take the
Wiki Server and make it yours.
You can use the built-in
customizations from the search page.
You can design your own CSS in a theme.
You can add JavaScript in a
theme to add functionality.
As a last resort,
you can change the XSLT to change the
HTML that's generated by the server.
And, of course, as James showed you,
you can use the API to get data into and,
of course,
pull data out of the server and integrate
it with your own other applications.
So for more information,
I'd encourage you to talk to Mark Malone.
And the other thing is that
if you go to the attendee site
for this particular course,
you'll find links to the PDF,
which describes in detail
how to accomplish some of the
things that we've done today,
and also provides links
to the documentation for
Prototype and Scriptaculous.
And with that, I'd like to bring the
Apple engineers up for Q&A.